Transaction and transaction management in SQL (#2813)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/transaction-management-in database/index.md.md

---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true
url: /transaction-management-in database/
title: Transaction management in database
description: 
author: paul-mwangi
date: 2021-07-08T00:00:00-07:41
topics: []
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/transaction-management-in database/hero.jpg
    alt: Transaction management in database
---
### Introduction

> A transaction is a logical unit of work performed on a database. They are logically ordered units of work completed by the end-user or an application. A transaction is made up of one or more database modifications. Creating, updating, or deleting a record from a table, for example. To preserve data integrity and address database issues, it's critical to keep track of these transactions. We can bundle SQL queries together and run them as a single transaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A transaction is a logical unit of work performed on a database. They are logically ordered units of work completed by an end-user or application. A transaction is made up of one or more database modifications. For example, creating, updating, or deleting a record from a table. To preserve data integrity and address database issues, it's critical to keep track of these transactions. We can bundle SQL queries together and run them as a single transaction.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Prerequisities

> Before learning this tutorial you need to have basics in SQL(structured query language) and understand how to create a database which we will be working from and performing our transactions against.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before going through this tutorial, you need to have basic knowledge of SQL(structured query language) and understand how to create a database that we will be working from and performing our transactions against.
```

### Transaction states 

> There are various database transaction states as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are various database transaction states as follows:
```

1. Active state- this is the state in which a transaction execution process begins. Operations such as read or write are performed on the database.
2. Partially committed- means that a transaction is only partially committed once it has been completed.
3. Committed stage- After a transaction execution is completed successfully the transaction is in committed state.All changes made to the database are permanently documented.
4. Failed state- If a transaction is aborted while in the active state, or if one of the checks fails, the transaction is in the failed state.
5. Terminated state- This state happens once the transaction leaving the system cannot be restarted once again.

### Transaction properties 
There are four main properties of a transaction represented in the acronym ACID referring to; Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

1. COMMIT- Saves the changes done against the database.
2. ROLLBACK- Redoes the changes done before being commited to the database.
3. SAVEPOINT-saves a point in a transaction on which to carry out a rollback.
4. SET TRANSACTION- Gives a name to a transaction.

### COMMIT command
The COMMIT command saves changes made to a database as part of a transaction. The COMMIT command preserves all database transactions since the previous COMMIT or ROLLBACK command.
The syntax of the COMMIT command; 

```SQL
COMMIT
```
We can delete the records from the table that have fees=40000 and commit the changes in the database.

```SQL
DELETE FROM STUDENTS
WHERE FEES = 40000;
COMMIT;
```
This command will delete the row from the table which has fees equal to 40000 and save the changes to the database.

### ROLLBACK command
The ROLLBACK command can only undo transactions from the last ROLLBACK or COMMIT command executed.

> The ROLLBACK command can only be used to undo transactions from the last ROLLBACK or COMMIT command issued.

Reviewer: Repetition. Consider revising.
